« Back to browse results
Broadcasting (Repeal of Advertising Restrictions) Amendment Bill
Search within this Bill 
By clauses
View whole (7KB)
Versions and APs
Add to web feed
Order a commercial print
Print/Download PDF [109KB]
Contents
Previous clause
Next clause
Tag clause
Remove
Previous hit
Next hit
Broadcasting (Repeal of Advertising Restrictions) Amendment Bill

Government Bill

111—1

Explanatory note
General policy statement

The Bill repeals section 81 of the Broadcasting Act 1989. Section 81 restricts broadcast television advertising on Sunday and Anzac Day mornings between 6 am and noon, and both television and radio broadcast advertising on Christmas Day, Good Friday, and Easter Sunday.

The stated intent of the restrictions when they were enacted in 1989 was to maintain a place for a diversity of less commercial programming (ie, public and special interest content).

Since the Broadcasting Act 1989 was enacted, technology and audience consumption habits have changed. The advent of the internet and smart phones, and emergence of on-demand and streaming services, has meant that fewer people are engaging with content through traditional linear formats. These changes have reduced the reach and impact of section 81, which applies only to traditional linear television and radio broadcasting. On-demand and live-streamed content are not subject to the restrictions under section 81.

The Bill—

supports a level playing field for New Zealand media companies by removing the regulatory distinction between different media platforms:

helps modernise the Broadcasting Act 1989 by removing restrictions that are out of step with contemporary commercial regulation:

allows New Zealand media companies to realise additional advertising revenue, which will help support the ongoing production and distribution of local content.

Departmental disclosure statement

The Ministry for Culture and Heritage is required to prepare a disclosure statement to assist with the scrutiny of this Bill. The disclosure statement provides access to information about the policy development of the Bill and identifies any significant or unusual legislative features of the Bill.

A copy of the statement can be found at http://legislation.govt.nz/disclosure.aspx?type=bill&subtype=government&year=2024&no=111

Clause by clause analysis

Clause 1 is the Title clause.

Clause 2 provides that the Bill comes into force on the day after Royal assent.

Clause 3 provides that the Bill amends the Broadcasting Act 1989 (the Act).

Clause 4 repeals section 81 of the Act to remove advertising restrictions. Section 81 restricts television advertising on Sunday mornings and the morning of Anzac Day, and restricts television and radio advertising on Christmas Day, Good Friday, and Easter Sunday.

Hon Paul Goldsmith

Broadcasting (Repeal of Advertising Restrictions) Amendment Bill

Government Bill

111—1

Contents
	Explanatory note	
1	Title	
2	Commencement	
3	Principal Act	
4	Section 81 repealed (Advertising hours)	

The Parliament of New Zealand enacts as follows:

1
Title

This Act is the Broadcasting (Repeal of Advertising Restrictions) Amendment Act 2024.

2
Commencement

This Act comes into force on the day after Royal assent.

3
Principal Act

This Act amends the Broadcasting Act 1989.

4
Section 81 repealed (Advertising hours)

Repeal section 81.